---
layout: single
title:  "Sower"
date:   2027-08-27 18:11:00 +0100
categories: book-review
---

## Summary

Set in a dystopian future, this novel follows Lauren Olamina's thoughts as she grows in a world without any future prospects. The recurrent theme of the book is the development of her own religion, Earthseed, based on the idea that God is change.

## Related titles
- *Ensaio sobre a cegueira - Jose Saramago* 

On the crudeness of humanity when basic needs are unmet.
- *Station Eleven - Emily St. John Mandel* 

On travelling in a post-apocalyptic world, and how trust and relationships develop.
- *The Blue Book of Nebo - Manon Steffan Ros*

On the importance of writing.


## General thoughts
### How a minister's daughter develops a new religion
Lauren is the eldest of four brothers, and the daughter of the minister. Having religion be such a big part of the family and the community makes it hard to imagine a world without it. Her rebellious spirit pushes her to question her father and to look for alternatives. Others who live in the community but are not as close to the minister are more likely to turn to atheism where their religion fails them, rather than having the will and creativity to set up a whole new system.

### Preparedness, and choosing when to trust
Living in the gated community, Lauren feels less safe than her peers. She has the nagging feeling that the community is fragile, that change is inevitable. She knows how easy it is to lose everything. Her foresight in having an "escape bag" for emergencies is admirable, and unshared by the rest of the community. 
Her father prioritizes not scaring the neighbors, promoting a feeling of safety. Finding a balance between remaining calm and being prepared is recurrent throughout the book.

Once the community is destroyed, Lauren comes to trust the two surviving people from the community that she encounters. People she may have criticized before now become the only remnants of hope that she has. In large communities, smaller groups are formed. With the community gone, the remaining individuals are the ones who feel the most like home.

### Relationship with Bankole
Traveling as a group with no one to trust really reduces the dating pool. After Harry and Zahra get together, and all the other people default to relating to each other in monogamous couples, Lauren starts her relationship with Bankole. Reading this I felt uncomfortable with the age gap, I think 18 to 57 is too wide a gap even in a post apocalyptic world. I was glad that the book was explicit about this, with Bankole being surprised and calling himself out after sleeping with a teenager. Still, it made it easier for me to imagine him younger, and I don't see how the age gap added to the depth of the relationship or the story.


### Hyperempathy
Being a sharer (also called hyperempathy) is the fantasy part of the novel. Whenever someone feels pain, Lauren shares their pain. This can be debilitating when so many people are injured so often, and she has to keep it a secret because it can be used to hurt her. The hyperempathy makes her vulnerable. She will always try to appear strong but know that she can't survive on her own, that she needs people around to protect her.

I believe Lauren's hyperempathy plays a big role in the development of Earthseed. She is someone that knows how important community is, and knows that she cannot survive without it. So, rather than thinking of saving herself, escaping, abandoning everyone, she wants to create "Earthseed communities", focusing on the things that bring people together. 


### Having hope in a world without future
While reading this I wondered: Can hope only be found through religion?

 Writing in 2025, the feeling of impending doom is constant. However, I imagine people in the 60s, 80s or 2000s also felt hopeless when thinking about the future.


Seeing ruthless capitalism expand and thrive throughout the world, Israel killing children in Gaza,
the US spiraling into a libertarian dystopia, and having record breaking temperatures every summer since I can remember, how can we imagine a non dystopian future? And if we don't have a future, what helps us carry on?

Growing up an atheist I struggle to take religion seriously, I try to base my decisions on the scientific method and strive to be as rational as possible. However, I also find myself hopeless, sometimes struggling to see what it's all for, not fully understanding the world we live in.
I wonder if religion, specifically Earthseed, creates the communities required to feel safe, and hopeful, and accepting of the uncontrollable things that happen to us, even when they're not for the better. Earthseed in particular helps us embrace change in a time of uncertainty.

Do I sometimes feel relief when thinking about the collapse of society? I think I have a secret desire for simple living, a time where I don't spend 8 hours a day creating value for shareholders, where instagram sounds like a weird fantasy of the past, and I don't have to worry about what a Labubu doll is. Dystopian novels such as this one help me stop fantasizing about the downfall of society. I feel more grateful to have secure access to water and food, shelter, and knowing my loved ones are happy and healthy.
